the following content is provided under a Creative Commons license
your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer
high-quality educational resources for free
to make a donation or view additional materials from 100 to them IT courses
visit MIT OpenCourseWare at 0 CW
that MIT ided you
home
the
in
the new
are
for
over the last several lectures we've dealt with the representation
of linear time-invariant systems through convolution
and just to remind you over basic strategy
essentially the idea was to
exploit the notion of when the arity by
decomposing the input into summer basic inputs
and then using when the arity to tell us that the output can be represented as
the corresponding linear combination of the Associated outputs
so if we have a linear system
either continuous-time and discrete-time for example with continuous time
if the input is decomposed as a linear combination
a basic inputs with each of these basic inputs
generating an Associated output and if the system is linear
then the output love the system
is the same linear combination love The Associated outputs
and the same statement is identical
both for continuous-time in discrete-time so
the strategy is to decompose the input into these basic inputs
and the imports
were chosen also with some particular
strategy in mind in particular for both continuous-time
for discrete-time in this representation the
basic inputs used in the decomposition
are chosen first the ball so that
a broad class signals can be represented
interns are these basic inputs and second of all
so that the response to these basic inputs
is in some sense easy to compute now
in the representation which latest
to convolution the particular choice that we made
in the discrete-time case for our basic inputs
was a decomposition up the input interns
or delayed impulses and
The Associated outputs that that generated
were delayed versions of the impulse response
decomposing the input into a linear combination of these
the output into the corresponding linear combination of these
then led to the convolution some in
the discrete-time case and
in the continuous-time case a similar
kinda decomposition in terms of impulses and Associated representation
love the output in terms of the impulse response
led to the convolution in ago now
in this lecture and for number the succeeding lectures
will want to turn our attention to a very different
said the basic building blocks and
in particular the signals there
will be using as the building blocks for or more general signals
rather than impulses as we've dealt with before
will be in general complex exponentials
so in a general sense
in the continuous-time case and will be thinking in terms of a decomposition
afar signals as a linear combination I'll
complex exponentials continuous-time
or in the discrete-time case
complex exponentials where sees the case complex here
in discrete-time and s2 K's complex here
in continuous-time now
the basic strategy of course requires
dead we choose a settlement puts basic building blocks
which have two properties one is that
the system response be straightforward to compute were in some sense easy to
compute
and the second is that it be a fairly general said a building blocks
so that we can build lots of signals I love them
what will find with complex exponentials either continuous-time and discrete-time
is that they very nicely have those two properties
in particular the notion that the
output over linear time-invariant system is easy to compute
is tied to what's referred to as the eye can function property
a complex exponentials which will focus on
shortly in a little more detail
and second of all the fact that
weekend in fact represent very broad classes have signals as linear
combinations
these will be a topic an issue
that will develop in detail over in fact are the next
set of lectures this lecture and the next set of lectures
now in in doing this although
we could in fact begin with our attention focused
on in general complex exponentials
what will choose to do his first focus on the case in which
the exponent in the continuous-time cases
purely imaginary as i indicate here
and in the discrete-time case where
the magnitude of the complex number Z CK
is equal to 1 so what that corresponds to in the continuous-time case
is said building blocks
the form you DJ Omega sed Katie
and in the discrete-time case said a building blocks
the for eat a DJ Omega KN
well we'll see is a representation in these Terms
leads to what's for two as for EA
analysis and that's what we'll be dealing with over the next several
lectures
will then be exploiting this representation actually
through most the course and then toward
the end of the course will returned to generalizing
the for a representation to the discussion over plus transforms the
transforms
so for now we want to restrict ourselves to
complex exponentials a particular form in
and in fact also initially to continuous-time
signals and systems so let's begin
with the continuous-time case the complex exponentials that we want to
deal with
in and focus first the ball on what I refer to as
the eigenfunction property love this particular set a building blocks
we're talking about
basic signals the form either the J Omega some Katy
and this statement is there
for a linear time-invariant system the response to one of these
is 0 exactly the same form
just simply multiplied by a complex
factor that complex factor depending on
what the frequency Omega k is
now more or less the justification for this is the proof follows by
simply looking at the response to a complex exponential
using the convolution integral so
if we put a complex exponential
into a linear time-invariant system
with impulse response a gypsy then
we can express the response as i've indicated here
we can then recognize that this complex exponential
can be factored into two terms and so
we can rewrite this complex exponential
as this product second recognize
that this term can be taken
outside the integral over here because of the fact that
it depends only on tea and not on tap now
and so what we're left with when we tracked this through
is that with a complex exponential input we get
an output which is the same complex exponential
namely this factor times
this integral and this integral is
what I referred to above as
H all omega-6 K
and so in fact we put in a complex exponential
we get out a complex exponential love the same frequency
multiplied by a complex constant and
that is what's referred to as the eigenfunction property I can function
meaning
that and I can function of a system or mathematical expression
is a function which when you put it through the system
comes out looking exactly the same except for a change in amplitude
that change in amplitude being the eigen value so
in fact this function is
the eigenfunction
and this bad you
is the I can bag
okay now it's because if the eigenfunction
property that complex exponentials a particularly convenient as building
blocks
namely you put it through the system they come out with the same form
and simply scale the other part to the question related
to the strategy that we've been pursuing is
to hope that the signals
can be used as building blocks to represent a
very broad classes signals through linear combination
and in fact that turns out to be the case with complex exponentials
as we worked our way through that
will first consider the case love periodic signals
and what that leads to is a representation a periodic signals
through what's called the forty a series following that
we will turn our attention to non periodic or as I refer to it a periodic
signals
and the representation that's developed
interns love linear combinations a complex exponentials
is what's referred to as the 48 transport so
the first thing that we want to deal with our periodic signals
and before you series okay so
what we're talking about then is the continuous-time
for a series and
the for a series is a representation for
periodic continuous-time signals we have
a signal then which is periodic and
were choosing t0 to denote the period
so its t0
then corresponds to the period
our periodic signal Omega 0
is to party over t0 as
you recall from our discussion love
periodic signals and sinusoids before and that's two pirates 0
so this is the fundamental frequency now
let's examine first the ball complex exponentials
and recognize first the ball that
there is a complex exponential that has
exactly the same period and
fundamental frequency as are more general periodic signal
namely the complex exponential you to the jail maker 0t
where Omega 0 is to Paul II over t0
or equivalent Lee t0 is to pie over Omega 0 now
that's the complex exponential which has
t0 as the fundamental period but
think there are harmonically related complex exponentials
that also have t0 as a period
although in fact their fundamental period shorter
so we can also look at complex exponentials
before either the JK Omega 0t
these likewise are periodic
with the period love t0
although in fact their fundamental period
is t0 divided by K or equivalently
to par i divided by their fundamental frequency
k Omega 0 so as K
a richer varies these correspond to
harmonically related complex exponentials
now with the forty a series
says and will justify this kinda bit by bit is the discussion goes I'm
what the four-day series says that in fact what for EA
said which was essentially the
is brilliant insight is that if I have
a very general periodic signal I can represented as a linear combination of
these harmonically related
complex exponentials so
that representation is what i've indicated here
and this summation is
what will be referred to as
the for EA
series
and as we proceed with the discussion there are two issues
couldn't that will develop one is assuming
that our periodic signal can be represented this way
how do we determine the for a series coefficients
as they refer to a suitcase that's one question
and the second question will be
how broad a class of signals in fact can be represented that
this way and bats another question their
will deal with separately
now just focusing on this representation
for a minute this representation
love the four EA series which
I repeated again
here
is what's referred to as the complex
exponential form love for EA series
and it's important to note incidently
day this summation involves frequencies k Omega 0
their are both positive and negative
in other words this index K runs over
limits that include both negative values and positive ads
now that complex exponential form is one
representation for before you a series
and in fact it's the one that we will be principally
relying on in this course there is another representation that
perhaps you come across previously
and that in a variety of other contacts is
is typically used which is called the trigonometric form
the forty a series without really tracking through the algebra
essentially we can get to the trigonometric for
from the complex exponential form by
recognizing that if we express the complex coefficients
in polar for or in rectangular for
and expand the complex exponential
term out in terms of cosine plus J sign
using just simply Oilers relation then
in we will end up with the representation
for the periodic signal
were a re expression love the for a series
expression that we had previously either in the form that I indicate here
we're now the periodic signal is expressed
in terms of a summation love cosines
with appropriate ample to in phase
or another acquittal or triggered a metric for
involves rearranging this
in terms or a combination
of cosines and signs now
in this representation the frequencies of the sinusoids
very only over positive frequencies
and typically one thinks
of periodic signals is having positive frequencies associated with them
however let's look back
at the complex exponential form
for the forty a series at the top of the board
and in that representation when we use this representation
will find it convenient to refer to both
positive frequencies and negative frequencies so
the representation that we will most typically be using is the complex
exponential form
and in that form what will find as we think it decomposing a periodic signal
in to its compliments
at different frequencies it will involve both positive frequencies
negative frequencies
okay now we have the
for EA series representation as i've indicated here
again so far I sidestepped the issue as
to whether this in fact represents all the signals that we'd like to represent
let's first address the issue
love how we determine these coefficients
Acer K assuming that in fact this representation is Val
and again all kinda move through the algebra
fairly quickly its a the outbreak steps the ones that
you can pursue more leisurely just the kinda
verify them in step through them but
essentially the algebra develops I did the recognition
that if we integrate a complex exponential
over one period t0
and I mean by this notation that this is an integral
over a period where I don't particularly care
where the period starts and where the period stops in other words
exactly what period I picked that this integral
is equal to t0 when M is equal to 0
and it's equal to 0 if am is not equal to 0
that follow simply from the fact that if we substitute in
for using Oilers relations so that we have the integral to cosign
was J times assign if M
is not equal to 0 than
of these integrals over a period are
0 the integral over sign it a periodic have a sinus or a cosigner sign
over an integral number periods is zero whereas
if M is equal to 0 this in a crawl
will be equal to 20 the integral the cosine
and the integral on the sign is equal to
okay well the next step
in developing the expression for the coefficients a Sat K
is to refer back to
before a series expression which was that except he
is equal to the sum with basic K either the JK Omega 0t
if we multiply both sides that by either minus
jaan Omega 0t and
integrate that over a period
both sides of the equation integrated over a period
so these two equations are equal and then
in essence interchange the summation and the integration
so that this pardon the expression cons outside the psalm
and then we combine these two complex exponentials together
where we come out is
the expression that i've indicated here in
and then essentially what happens at this point algebraically
is that we use the result that we just developed
to evaluate this cynical so
multiplying both sides the forty a series in and doing the integration
leads us after the appropriate manipulation
to the expression that
I have up here and
this is equal to
this integral is equal to t0
if K is equal to an
corresponding 20 up here and 80
otherwise which is what we have demonstrated or are you previously
and the upshot of all that then is that
the right hand side if this expression disappears
except for the term when K is equal to n
and so finally we have what I indicate here
taking t0 and moving it over to the other side of the equation
we then that then tells us
how we determine the forty a series coefficients
a7 Auris K so
that in effect and is the
what we refer to as the analysis equation the equation that begins with
excessive to me
and tells us how to get the for a series coefficients
what are referred to as
the 48 series synthesis equation
is the equation that tells us
how to build exit see outta love
these complex exponentials so we have the synthesis equation
which is the one that we started from we have
the analysis equation which is the equation
that we just developed
okay so we in effect have
going through the issue love assuming there for a series representation
is in fact valid how we get
the coefficients we want to address
somewhat the question love how broad a classic signals that we're talking
are we talking about and what's in fact amazing
and was for EA's amazing insight
was that it's a very broad class say but
let's first look at just some examples
in which we take a signal assume that it has the Fourier series representation
and see what the for a series coefficients look like so
will begin with what I refer to as
an antisymmetric periodic square wave periodic of course because we're talking
about periodic signals
square wave referring to its shape and
antisymmetric referring to the fact that it is an odd
time function in other words it is antisymmetric
about the origin now
the expression for the for a series coefficients
tells us that we determine a sieve K
by taking one over 20 times the integral over a period
affects 50 either minus JK Omega 0t
DT the most convenient thing in this case
is to choose a period which
let's say goes from minus 20 over to the plus 20 over to
so here except he is -1 here
expertise plus one and so
I've expressed the for a series called efficiency as
this integral that's from minus 20 over
and then and it said that is the
positive part of the cycle and so we have
these two integrals now I don't want to
tracked through the details both the algebra again I
I guess I've decided that that's much more fun for you do on your own
but the way it comes out when you go through it
is the expression that I finally indicate after
suggesting that there are a few more steps to follow
and what develops is that
those two integrals together for K
not equal to 0 come out to this expression
and that expression is not valid for k equal to 0
per kg equal to 0 we can go back to
the basic expression for the forty a series
which is one over t0 the integral over a period
exit see in the minus JK Omega 0 /td TD
for cake 10 of course this term
just simply becomes one and
so the zeroth coefficient is one over 20 times the integral
X 50 over a period now
going back to the original function
that we have what we're saying then is that
0th coefficient is one over 20 times the integral over
one period which is in effect the average value
and it straight forward to verify the for this case that average value
is equal to 0 okay
now let's look at
these for a series coefficients on a bar graph
and i've indicated that here the
expression for the for a series coefficients we just developed and
a involves its
0 for cake 0 it's a factor this form
for canine equal to 0 plotted on a bar graph
then we see values like this 0
at cake 0 and and associated values
and their number things to focus on
when you look at this
one is the fact that the forty a series coefficients for this example
are surely imaginary
a second is that the Fourier series coefficients for this example
are odd sequence in other words if you look at this sequence which you see
are these values for negative K
flipped over so there their imaginary
and odd and
what that results in when
you look at the
the triggered a metric form the 4e a series
is that in fact those conditions if you put the terms altogether
lead you to a trigger a metric representation
which involves only sign terms
in other words no co-signed turns let me just draw your attention to the fact
that
since a suitcase the acer case or imaginary
this jay takes care that fact so that these coefficients
are in fact real so what this says
is that for the antisymmetric square wave the
it in effect the forty a series is a sign series
the antisymmetric square wave is an odd function
sinusoids are not are odd functions and so this is all kinda reasonable that
we're building
odd function ido odd functions
as an additional aside which a I won't
exploit or refer to any further here
but just draw your attention to is that another aspect
love this periodic square wave the particular one that we chose
is dead it is what's referred to as a
on harmonic function in other words
for even values if K
before a series coefficients 30 their only 90
for iPad use K
okay now let's look at another example another example
is the symmetric periodic square wave
and this is in fact example
4.5 worked out in more detail in the tax then
I won't bother to work work this out in detail here
except to draw your attention to several
points here is the symmetric periodic square wave
and what I mean by symmetric
is that it's an even time function
now just kinda extrapolating your intuition
what we you should expect is that if if it's a
only even time function it should be built up
or buildable if it's built up a little %ah to only
even sinusoids and in fact
that's the case so if we look at
the four-day series coefficients for this
the zeroth coefficient again as the average value
which in this case is a half here I've plotted
hi times the for a series coefficients so
0 thank you as pie over to
the coefficients are now and even sequence
and in in other words symmetric
about cake 0 and the consequences that
is that when you take these coefficients
and put together the equivalent triggered a metric form
the triggered a metric for involves
only cosines and no
sign turns now
you'll see this in and other examples not that will do in the lecture but
examples in the text in the video manual if in fact
the square way was neither symmetric or antisymmetric
then the trigonometric form would involve both
sines and cosines and
that is of course the more general case
furthermore in the two examples are shown here
we we in both cases
the signal is odd harmonic
in other words for even bad news K
the coefficients are equal to 0 although I won't justify that here that's a
consequence that the fact that
this symmetry is exactly about half a period
and if you made the on time with a square wave
different in relation to the of time then that property would also
disappear
now
what's kind amazing actually in
is that if we take a square wave like
I have here or as I had in the antisymmetric case
the implication is that I can bill
that square wave by adding up
on of signs were cosines and
it really seems kinda amazing because the square wave after all
is a very discontinuous functions
sinusoids are very continuous and it seems puzzling that in fact
you can do that well let's look in a little bit of detail
how the sinusoidal
turns and up to
build a square wave and to do that
let's first define what I refer to
as a partial song so
here we have the expression
which is the synthesis
equation telling us how accept T could be represented
as complex exponentials if it can be and
let's consider just a finite number of turns in this song
and so X 7ft of course as n goes to infinity
approaches the infinite sum that we're talking about and although we could do
this more generally let's not let's focus on the symmetric square wave case
where because it the symmetry of these coefficients namely that a suitcase
equal to minus
is equal to a serb minus K we can rewrite
these turns as cosine turns and so this partial some
can be express the way arm expressing it here
well let's look at
a few the Stearns on the graph I have
first the ball exit tea which is our
original square wave
the turn that I indicate here
is the factor over half which
is this term
with any calls one that would correspond to anyone co-signed term
to that and so the sole those two would be yes
which looks a little close to the square wave but
certainly not very close to it at all and in fact
in its somewhat hard to imagine without
seeing the terms build-up how in fact by adding more and more turns we can
generate something
that is essentially flat except at the discontinuities
so let's look at this example and what I'd like to show
is this example but now as we add many
more turns to it and let's see in fact
how these individual turns add up
to build up the square way so
this is the square wave that we want to build up
through the forty a series is this some of sinusoids
and the term for cake 0 will be a constant which represents the DC value
with this
and so in the partial sum as we develop it
the first thing they will show is just the term for cable 0
now for cables one we would add to that
one sinusoidal term and
so some love the term for cake was one cake was 0
is represented here now
when we go to K calls to because of the fact that this is an odd harmonic
function
in fact the term for cake was it was too
will be will have zero amplitude and so this won't change
here we show the
for a series would cake was to and there's no change
and then we will go to cable 23
and
and we will be adding then one additional sinusoidal term here's cake
was three
when we go to cable 24 again there won't be any change
but their will be another term that's
added at cake was five here and cable 6
again because it's odd harmonic no change and finally cable 7
is shown here okay and we can begin to see that
this starts to look somewhat like the square wave but
now to really emphasize how this builds up let's
more rapidly and Ed many more terms and in fact
increase the number of turns up to about a hundred recognizing
that the shape will only change on the inclusion
all the odd number terms not the even-numbered turns because it's an odd
harmonic function so now we're
increasing and we're building up toward
k equal to 100 200 turns an
notice that it is the higher
order turns dead tend to build up
the discontinuity corresponding to the notion
there'd the discontinuities or sharp edges in a signal
in fact are represented through the higher
frequencies in the forty a series and here we have
a not too unreasonable approximation
to the original square wave there is the artifact of the ripples at the
discontinuity and in fact
though that rippling behavior at the discontinuities
is referred to as the Gibbs phenomenon
and it's an inherent part love the forty a series representation at
discontinuities
now to emphasize this
let's decrease the number of turns back down
and we will carry this down
to k equal to 1 again
to emphasizes how the sinusoids are building up
the square wave here we are back at Cape cools
1 and then finally we
will and back in the sinusoids that we took out
and let's build this back up to 100 turns
showing the approximation dead
we generated with a hundred turns to the square way
okay so so what you saw is that
in fact we got awfully close to a square wave
and the other thing think that was kind of interesting about it is that went
along
was the fact that with the low frequencies
what we were tending to bill was the general behavior
and as the higher frequencies came in
that tended to contribute the discontinuities
work contribute to the discontinuity and
in fact something their will
standout more and more as we go through our discussion
love for a series of 48 transforms is
that general statement that its the low-frequency
terms bat represent
the broad time behavior and
its the high-frequency terms that are used to build up
the sharp transitions in the time domain
okay now we need to get a little more precise
about the question of how in fact
the 48 series
or when before you a series represents
the functions that we're talking about and in what sense they represent them
in and so if we look
again at the synthesis
ok wage in were really wanna ask
is if we add up enough for these terms
in what sense does this some represent
this time function well
let's again use the notion love are partial some
so we have the partial song down here
in and we can think love the difference between
this partial some and the
original time function as
the ever and I've defined the error here
and what we would like to know is does this error
decrease as we aired more and more turns
and in fact in what sense if the air does decrease in what sense
there's a decrease now in detail
this is a fairly complicated an elaborate topic I don't mean to make
that sound frightening
its mainly a statement that I don't want to explore it and a lot of detail
but it relates to what is referred to
as the issue a convergence the forty a series
and the convergence the 48 series
the the bottom line on at the kinda and statement
can be made in several ways one statement
related to convergence the for a series is the following if
I have a time function which
is what is referred to as square integrable namely
its integral over a period is finite then
what you can show kinda amazingly
is that the energy E in
that error in other words the energy in the difference between the original
function
and the partial some the energy and that
goes to zero as n goes to infinity
a somewhat tighter condition is a condition referred to as it the racially
conditions which says that
if the time function
is absolutely integral not square honorable but absolutely integral
and I've kinda hedge the issue by just simply referred to accept T as being
well behaved
then the statement is dead the error in fact goes to zero
as and increases except at the discontinuities
and what well-behaved means in that statement
is that as discussed in the book there are a finite number
maxima and minima in any period and a finite number finite discontinuities
which is essentially
always the case so under square in Accra bility
what we have is the statement not that the partial sum goes to the right value
at every point
but that the energy in the air goes to zero
under the jewish way conditions it says that in fact the signal goes to the
right back to you
at every time instant except
at the discontinuities so
going back to the square wave
the square wave satisfies either one of those conditions and so
what the consequences is that with the square wave
if we looked at the error then in fact
what we would find is that the energy
in the error would go to zero as we at
more and more turns in the partial some and in fact
if says the square wave also satisfies the dish les conditions
the actual value with the air the difference between
the partial some and the true value will will
actually go to zero that difference will go to zero
except at the discontinuities and
that in fact is kinda evident as
we watch the function build-up
by adding up these terms and so in fact
let's go back and see again
the development the partial sons
in relation to the original time function let's observe
this time again basically what we saw before which is that it builds up
to the right answer and furthermore what will plot this time also as a function
of time
is the energy in the air and what we'll see is that the energy in the air
will be tending toward zero as the number
turns increases so
once again we have the square wave and
we want to again show the buildup of the
forty a series this time showing also
how the energy in the air decreases as we had more and more turns
well once again will begin
with cake was 0 corresponding to the constant term
and was shown on the bottom trace is
the energy in the air between those two and
will then and the term for cables 1
to the DC term and will see that the energy will decrease
when we do that here we have then the summer
cake 10 cables 1 now
with cables to the energy won't decrease
any further because it's an odd harmonic function
that's what we've just added in when we add in the term for cables 3
again will see the energy in the air decrease
as reflected in the bottom curve
so there we are at cables 3 when
we go to cable 24 there again is no change in the air
at cables 5 again the air decreases
k equal to 6% know there will be no change again
an 8k course 7 the energy decreases
and now let's show the how the air decreases by building up the number
turns much more rapidly already the air has gotten somewhat small on the scale
in which were showing it so let's expand out
the ever scale the vertical axis
displaying the energy in the error so that we could watch
how the energy decreases as
we had more and more terms so here we have
the vertical scale expanded and
now what we'll do is increase
the number of turns in the forty a series and watch the energy in the air
at decreasing
always decreasing of course on the inclusion
love the odd number turns and
not on the inclusion of the even-numbered turns because the fact
that it's an odd harmonic function now the energy in the air
asymptotically will approach 0 although
point by point the forty a series will never be equal to the square wave
it will at every instant of time
except at the discontinuities where there will always be
some ripple corresponding to
what's referred to as the Gibbs phenomenon
okay well so what we've seen in is
a and a quick look at the Fourier series
representation love periodic signals
we more broadly
wanna have a more general representation
love oath signals in terms of complex exponentials and so our next step
will be to move toward a representation
I'll not periodic or a periodic signals
now the details if this I leave for the next lecture
the only thought that I want introduced at this point
is the basic strategy you which
is somewhat amazing and kinda interesting to reflect on
in the interim the basic strategy
with in a periodic signal is
to think love representing
this a periodic signal as a linear combination of complex exponentials
by this simple trick all
periodically replicating this signal
generating a periodic signal
using a Fourier series representation
for that periodic signal and then
simply letting the period go to infinity
as the period goes to infinity that periodic signal becomes the original
a periodic one that we have before and a 40 a series
representation then becomes what we refer to as the Fourier transform so
that's just a quick look at kind of the basic idea
and approach that will take in the next lecture will develop this
a little more carefully more fully moving from the 40 a series which we've
used for periodic signals
to develop the for EA transform
which will then be representation for a periodic see
thank you